Electrical power grids are an essential, yet extremely complicated piece infrastructure of city life. Responsible for the generating electricity and delivering it to the final consumers, the sheer sizes of some these power grids are a testimony to the difficulty of managing them. The Synchronous Grid of Continental Europe ([@SGCE]), for example, provides electricity to over 400 million people in 24 countries. In North America, two power grids are responsible for providing energy to the entire region, with the exception of Texas, Québec and Alaska ([@NATG]). 

Managing such power grids is as complex as it is relevant. Unexpected fluctuations in supply and demand may lead to power shortages (such as the 2003 Northeast Blackout, that affected an estimated 55 million people in US and Canada ([@Northeast-Blackout])), or to other adverse effects (such as when clocks in Europe ran slow because Kosovo used more electricity than anticipated as a result of its conflict with Serbia in 2018 ([@Kosovo])). Human tampering is also another cause for concern, as seen in the California energy crisis, when electricity companies such as Enron deliberately created a shortage in electricity supply in order to inflate prices ([@California-Energy-Crisis])

Even when power grids are operating normally, there is still loss due to the complexities of managing such behemoths. In the U.S., for instance, as much as 5% of all generated energy is lost before reaching the customers ([@EIA]), leading states like New York to plan spending US$30 billion over the next decade in power grid maintenance alone ([@NYSERDA]).  

Smart grids have been proposed as a means to more efficiently manage power grids [@SmartGrid]. By implementing telemetry across the entire grid and employing algorithms that can seamlessly make adjust the generation, transmission and distribution of energy, experts argue we could reduce losses and environmental impact without significant impact to current electricity prices. To be precise, as far as residential and commercial buildings are concerned, estimates are that the CO2 emission of buildings can be reduced by 50-90% ([@RLEM2020]).

While plans have been proposed to substitute both the North American ([@SmartGrid-USA]) and the European ([@SmartGrid-EU]) current power systems by smart grids, actually implementing smart grids, however, has caveats and challenges of its own. Among the challenges, one that is of particular concern to Artificial Intelligence (AI) scholars is how to train the algorithm that will manage such grids.

In this paper, we use Reinforcement Learning to train an agent to manage a small power grid generated by the City Learn simulator package ([@Vazquez-Canteli2019]). We use this as an instance to illustrate how training times may be too long to be practically feasible, thereby compromising the potential values of such agents in real-world applications. We further discuss alternatives to speed up the training process.





